Unit 2.2 Electronic File Transfers

Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) Explained
One of the critical components of digital banking is file transfer systems. Let's first begin our discussion with Electronic Funds Transfers or EFT. They are electronically based payment systems that have been around since the 1960's. Banks use electronic fund transfers to exchange money. While actually it is a transfer of debt from one bank to another. Therefore, much of the money held by banks is in the form of debts owed to them. This evidence of debt is stored in the bank's computers. They allow rapid and efficient transmission of data about these debts between banks and updating of the debt records. 

EFT Component - Steps
Let's first start talking about EFT components in steps. Step one is to format payment files into a NACHA layout which we will be discussing shortly. Then to transmit these payment files to the ODFI, the Originating Depository Financial Institution bank. Then to send electronic remittance advices via e-mail, fax, or web files. Some important EFT features include: it provides detailed reporting, it accepts a return confirmation file from the bank making sure that they received it, and it uses an aggregation file to reduce unit transaction costs. 

It is all managed by NACHA
All of this is managed by NACHA which stands for the National Automated Clearing House Association, which manages the development, administration, and governance of the ACH Network, which is the backbone for the electronic movement of money and data here in the United States. It is funded by the financial institutions that it governs, and the ACH Network is a network for direct consumer, business, and government payments, which is governed overall by the NACHA Operating Rules. NACHA is a not-for-profit association which represents nearly 11,000 financial members. 

Two types of EFT
Now, EFT is a generic term that describes two different methods of transferring funds electronically, ACH and wire transfer. Both are executed through the Fed Reserve Bank System except for in-bank or on-us transactions. It's a common mistake to call an ACH payment a wire transfer. It's important to understand that each are handled by different departments at a bank. 

EFT Advantages
Now EFT offers a number of advantages. It offers time savings, because money transfer between virtual accounts takes a few minutes while a wire transfer or snail mail can take several days. It also provides expense controls. The virtual account contains the history of all transactions indicating the store and the amount you spent and you can check it at anytime. It offers low costs. Fees are usually about one percent of the total amount and this is a considerable advantage when compared to other options. Finally, it offers convenience. All the transfers can be performed at anytime, anywhere. All you need is access to the Internet. 

EFT Disadvantages
EFT also has a number of disadvantages. The first being restrictions in its use. Each payment system has its own limits regarding the maximum amount in the account and the number of transactions per day. There is also a problem with transferring money between different payment systems. A lot of the electronic payment systems do not cooperate well with each other. In this case, you would have to use the services of an e-currency exchange, file translator. It also does not provide the lack of total anonymity. The transaction information including the amount, the time and the recipient are stored in the database of the payment system. Which means the intelligence agencies has access to this information. The necessity of Internet access is also another disadvantage because if the Internet fails, you cannot get to your online account. 

Wire Transfers
Now let's talk about wire transfers. Which is the movement of funds in real time and effective immediately. The Federal Reserve Bank or FRB uses fed wires up to 6:00 PM locally according to the fed district that you reside in. Book transfers are memo posted up until midnight. They contain something called ZBA or zero balance accounts which sweeps are bank transfers. The bank maintains a Fed-wire affects bank reserve account at the FRB. Sending bank's account at the FRB gets debited and the receiving bank's account at the FRB gets credited. There is also something called CHIPS which is a Clearing House for Interbank Payment Systems that are used for foreign exchange in Euro dollars. 

Wire Transfer Utilization
Now as I mentioned earlier, wire transfers are more costly but there are times that they should be used. It is appropriate to use it when you have time sensitive payments, meaning, funds need to be moved the same day or extremely large dollar amounts. Some examples of this would be funding ACH payments like payroll direct deposit, or funding investments like at a custodian bank, or adjusting balances between depository banks, and finally, remitting payments to the US Treasury would be a good example of when you should use wire transfers. 

ACH or Automated Clearing House
Now let's look at ACH or Automated Clearing House. ACH files are electronic payments or credits completed in standardized formats of NACHA that allow these banking transactions to be sent anywhere in the United States. The ACH network is a funds transfer system governed by NACHA rules which provides the clearing of electronic entries for participating financial institutions. Virtually, every major bank in the United States is affiliated with NACHA. 

Two Types of ACH 
There are two types of ACH files: direct deposits and electronic drafts. Direct deposits are always initiated by the sender. The sender's account is debited and the receiver's account is credited. The receiver's account usually uses a bank account or debit card account. As for electronic drafts, they are usually initiated by the sender or receiver. If by a sender, the sender authorizes a third party to initiate a transaction. If by the receiver, the receiver initiates the transactions. Electronic drafts are also referred to as direct payments. 

Putting it all together
So how does this all work? Let's begin with the thought that the Coca-Cola company is looking to send a file of payments to another company. It begins by sending a transaction file to the Originating Depository Financial Institution or ODFI, who then sends that transaction or file to the ACH operator, in this instance, the Fed Reserve Board, who then transmits the file to the Receiving Depository Financial Institution or the RDFI, who sends it finally to the receiver, the company or employee who is looking to get the file. Then there's an authorization that goes back to Coke to confirm that everything happened. Overlooking all of this is both NACHA, the governing organization, and an organization or trade group such as EastPay. 

Differences Between Wire Transfer and ACH
Now there are some differences between wire transfer and ACH and things you have to consider when you're trying to decide which one to use. Wire transfers cost about $6.75 per item as opposed to ACH which is about one cent. Wire transfers provide same-day funds. ACH transactions provide next-day funds. The wire transfer is almost instantaneous. With ACH it's typically a one-day delay in settlement. So you should use wire transfer for critical payments like debt service and use ACH for large batch files like payroll. 

International ACH Considerations
Now there are some things to consider when looking at International ACH Transactions. Not all countries have an ACH-like clearing system and those with clearing systems have different settlement times and formats, so you need to know the rules. You also need to understand what currencies are you dealing with and are you dealing with multiple currencies. You will need to be aware that there are different bank holidays in different countries and can affect the dates the money is deposited into foreign accounts. You also need to make sure to understand the MICR line or the account information when setting up the customer account in the ERP system. 

Magnetic Ink Character Recognition Line (MICR)
As some of you may not really know what a MICR line is, it stands for the magnetic ink character recognition line at the bottom of a check. It includes the bank's routing number, the customer's account number, and the check number. The magnetic ink character recognition line is printed using technology that allows certain computers to read and process the printed information without human intervention. 

The future of "FinTech" Digital Banking
So where is fintech leading digital banking? We are starting to see a steady increase in ACH business-to-business payments with no clearing house. EDI or electronic data interchange is becoming more standardized and mainstream in the electronic interchange of business information using a standardized format. EDI is also a process which allows one company to send information to another electronically rather than having to deal with paper at all. It's turning out that there is becoming an increasing cost of check processing as electronic businesses grow, which is expanding ACH offering including: international ACH payments. XML is emerging at this time to supplement or to actually replace EDI or electronic data interchange. 