Unit 2.4 Mergers and Acquisitions

Mergers and Acquisitions Terms
Let's continue our discussion about investments and talk about mergers and acquisitions. Let's start off by defining the terms. Acquisition is when a larger company takes over another usually smaller firm and clearly becomes the new owner. Typically the target company ceases to exist post-transaction from a legal corporate point of view. The acquiring corporation swallows the business. Merger is when two firms often about the same size, agree to go forward as a single new company rather than remain separately owned and operated. This action is more precisely referred to as a merger of equals. Both companies' stocks are surrendered and a new company stock is issued in its place. 

Acquisitions
Let's look a little closer into acquisitions. Acquisitions are also known as takeovers or buyouts. In the 1980s, hostile takeovers and leveraged buyouts or LBOs were all the rage. Companies sought to acquire others through aggressive stock purchases and cared little about the target company's concerns. 

Types of Acquisitions
There are a couple of types of acquisitions, friendly where the companies cooperate in negotiations, hostile where the target is unwilling to be bought. Reverse takeover where a smaller firm will acquire management control of a larger company and keep its name for the combined entity. Reverse merger, this occurs when a private company that has strong prospects, and is eager to raise financing, buys a publicly listed shell company, usually one with no business and limited assets. 

Motives behind M&A
There are also a number of motives or reasons behind why organizations go through mergers and acquisitions. Some are hoping to get an economy of scale, some are looking for increased revenue or market share, some are looking for synergy between like organizations. There are others that are looking for diversification to narrowly focus their organization on to a particular product or topic or service. Also vertical integration, where you're looking to try to reduce costs by building a vertical integration into your organization. 

Failures of M&A
Mergers and acquisitions are not always effective and there are reasons for these failures. The high failure rates could be related to a number of things, the biggest being that the merger and acquisition performance is actually a multi-dimensional function and is extremely complicated. For a successful deal, the following key success factors should be taken into account. There should be strategic logic involved that's focused on six things, similar markets, complimentary markets, operational similarities, complimentary operations, market power, and purchasing power. You should also look at organizational integration and focus on three things in regard to that: acquisition experience, relative size and cultural compatibility. Finally you should focus on the financial and price perspective by focusing on three things, the acquisition premium, what is it going to take us to buy that organization? The bidding process, and proper due diligence. 

M&A Advisory Services in Investment Banking
This is where investment banking and mergers and acquisition advisory services come into play. For investment banks, mergers and acquisition advising is highly profitable, and there are many types of transactions. Usually M&A advisers come directly from corporate finance departments of investment banks. Unlike public offerings, merger transactions do not directly involve salespeople, traders, or research analyst. In general, M&A advisory falls into the laps of M&A specialists in two buckets; seller representation or buyer representation. 

Representing the Seller
First, in representing the seller an I-bank that represents a potential seller has a much greater likelihood of completing a transaction and therefore getting paid than an investment bank that represents a potential acquirer. The sell-side representation comes when a company asks an investment bank to help it sell a division, a plant, or a subsidiary operation. The work involved in finding a buyer includes writing a selling memorandum. If the client hopes to sell a semiconductor plant for instance, the I-banker will contact firms in that industry, as well as buyout firms that focus on purchasing technology or high-tech manufacturing operations. 

Representing the Buyer
Representing the buyer on the buy-side however is an entirely different animal. Investment bank contacts the firm their client wishes to purchase. Attempts to structure a palatable offer for all parties and make the deal a reality. However, most of these proposals do not work out. Because the I-bank primarily collects fees based on completed transactions, their work often goes unpaid. 

Leveraged Buyouts
Now let's spend a little bit of time talking about leveraged buyouts. Let's start by defining what is a leveraged buyout. Leveraged buyout or LBO or a highly-leveraged transaction HLT occurs when a financial sponsor acquires a controlling interest in a company's equity and where a significant percentage of the purchase price is financed through leveraging or borrowing. The assets of the acquired company are used as collateral for the borrowed capital, sometimes with the assets of the acquiring company. 

Why LBO?
But why would both sides go through a leveraged buyout? The investors itself only needs to provide a fraction of the capital for the acquisition, so the entry is relatively low. Assuming the economic internal rate of return on the investment exceeds the weighted average interest rate on the acquisition debt, returns to the financial sponsor will be significantly enhanced. 

Sales
Now let's talk about the types of sales in an investment bank. First, let's talk about institutional sales, and it's often called research sales, as sales people are focusing on selling the firm's research to other institutions. There's then retail brokerage which involves managing the account portfolios for individual investors usually called retail investors. There's also something called Private Client Services or PCS and that's a cross between institutional sales and retail brokerage. PCS focuses on providing money management services to extremely wealthy individuals. Finally, there's something called a sales-trader, which is a hybrid between sales and trading. Sales-traders essentially operate in a dual role as both salesperson and block trader. A sales-trader will often refer a client to a research analyst. 

Trading
On the trading side, we are generally talking about three things, market making, execution broker and proprietary trading. In market making, we're talking about quotes, both a buy and sell price in a financial instrument, and hoping to make a profit on the bid and the offer spread. As far as the execution broker, its execution only, which means that the broker will only carry out the client's instructions to buy or sell. Finally there is proprietary trading. The firm's traders are actively trading financial instruments with the firm's own money as opposed to its customers money, in order to make profit for the investment bank itself. If you listen to the, "Experts in trading," they say you will need three skills, fundamental analysis, technical analysis, and a gut feeling. If you can combine those three things, you should do very well in this industry. In reality, if you talk to most traders, they're saying that you need modern resources for the Wall Street trader, which involve research material like horoscopes, a number cruncher which could be a pair of dice, internal sources, meaning your friends and family, and you need some outside consultant where some contend that you would do just as well with an aid ball. 

Research
The final area that investment banks can make money and something we've talked about briefly up till now is research. This entails intermediaries between companies and the buy-side, corporate finance and sales and trading and research analysts. They form a hub of investment banks to look at possible opportunities for investments. Out of this, they produce an analyst research idea that is then pushed on to marketers of the research reports and experts in the industries outside of their space to try to sell this information to other people. 

The Future of FinTech Investment Banking
Now I know this was a tidal wave of information relative to investment banking and how does that play into fintech. I want to spend just a few minutes talking about all the things we've discussed and what does the future of fintech investment banking look like. If you look at the projections where we're at going forward is decrease customer profitability. At the same time, there will be increased competition in space. There will also be a continued development and collection of data sources, as demand for real-time information continues to increase. There should also be a focus on cross sell of products with an eye on capital returns, and how do we marry products together to bundle them and sell them more effectively? There's also a confluence of disruptors, one of those being blockchain that we will talk about in a few classes. A continued evolution of fintech means flexibility will become crucial to survival for financial institutions. 