Unit 2.5 Wealth Management

What is Wealth Management?
Wealth management is a professional service that combines financial investment advice, accounting and tax services, retirement planning and estate planning. Investment companies now manage over $18.2 trillion in assets, encompassing over 90 million US retail investors. It's experienced strong growth over the last 25 years mostly due to asset appreciation, strong demand from households due to rising household wealth, and the evolution of employer-based retirement systems. 

Wealth Management is Evolving?
Wealth management is currently in a state of transition. As the baby boomer generation, those born between 1946 and 1965 are entering retirement age. At the same time, the millennial segment is increasing their impact across all financial services as they age and garner more income and wealth. While millennials are in the early years of wealth accumulation, the size of the segment makes them important to the banking industry. According to Deloitte, millennials represent 40 percent of the global adult population in 2015. By 2020, the aggregated net worth of global millennial population is expected to grow to more than double compared to 2015, with estimates ranging from 19-24 trillion dollars. 

The Wealth Management World is Changing?
According to a recent LinkedIn Millennial Study, they are eternal optimists about their own financial future. Ninety percent of millennials use social networks to seek opinions regarding financial markets. They value relationships with companies they frequent, they are more active savers than generations before them, and they are influenced heavily by relationships that family members currently have with companies. 

The New face of Wealth Management
So wealth management, as we know it, is becoming obsolete. The coming age of a new type of client, new digital options such as robo platforms and a plethora of new regulations combined to completely change the current playing field. Digitally led hybrid advice differentiated for each client experience is upon us already. This model is so completely different from what most firms have built upon that it requires rethinking and retooling now because the coming of a new breed of client is here. Dealing with these shifts is essential to remain relevant in an industry that looks very little like its predecessor. 

New Clientele Requires new business model
Therefore, financial institutions will need to begin to adjust their business models to account for these new clientele. You see their new clients are, in some cases, their old clients. But women in millennials will comprise a much larger portion of their client mix going forward. Traditional clients are approaching the largest transfer of assets ever due to an aging global population. Millennials, these tech-savvy potential clients will account for almost three quarters of all income by the year 2025, and 84 percent of them said social opinions influence their purchase decisions, which requires Fintech to begin to use social media presence within their existing marketing strategies. Millennials also want companies that are socially responsible. As for women, women's earning power is continuing to rise, and they want a new breed of wealth management, communicative, interactive with frequent touch points. 

The digital wealth management revolution
Financial institutions find themselves in the middle of a digital wealth management revolution, online portfolio management solutions that aim to invest client assets by automating client advisory. Not to long ago if you look at 1.0, wealth management was handled through online questionnaires and product or portfolio proposals with listed ETFs and funds and shares. What is expected now is a fully automated investment system that is self-learning algorithms and automatically shifts assets as they are needed. 

What is robo-advising? 
Robo advisors are digital platforms that provide automated algorithm-driven financial planning services with little to no human supervision. A typical robo advisor collects information from clients about their financial situation and future goals through an online survey and then uses the data to offer advice in automatically invest client assets. 

Why is Robo-Advising Beneficial
So what are the advantages to robo-advising as compared to traditional wealth management? Well, robo-advising removes brokers but still generate solid returns that are fraction of the cost. It is customizable and personalized to meet each individual needs. There is no cash sitting unused for the client waiting to be invested. There are lower fees per transaction and lower minimum investments involved. 

Fintech robo-advisors are growing faster than older players. 
If you compare Wealthfront that was discussed in the first module with Charles Schwab who has been around for years and years, it only took a little over a year for Wealthfront to get a billion dollars in assets under management in their organization. It took Charles Schwab over six years to get $1 billion or the same amount. So they are growing extremely fast and the people in existing investment markets had better beware. 

Older generations still want and in-person advisors
But remember in a previous discussion when we talked about the mix of clientele being the aging population and the new clients, it's interesting to note that older generations still want in-person advisors. Particularly when you look at the gen X and the baby boomer segment about how do they feel about robo-advising. What's interesting if you look at the bottom of the chart here, they say that 10 percent are comfortable having relationships with a financial advisor that exists entirely online, which means that there is some interest in robo-advising, but the vast majority of them still do not really trust online advice. However, robo-advising is still taking off. If you look at this chart, you can see that it's estimated by the year 2020, there's going to be $2.2 trillion in robo-advising alone. 